---
layout: post
title: Conventional thinking
date: '2011-04-04T20:25:27+00:00'
tags:
- wondercon
- money from dreams
- convention
- transmedia
- art
tumblr_url: http://nicknovitski.tumblr.com/post/4357442226/conventional-thinking
---
Went to Wondercon this weekend.  Oddly, I experienced it as being smaller than APE - the Alternative Press Expo, which I was lucky enough to be in town for last October.  I mean, it was bigger overall, but less than half of the convention floor was actual artists, and they were the only people I was interested in, so I was able to see the whole thing and then some in less than one day of walking back and forth.
The usual assortment of astoundingly talented people living the dream, and those who just could be.  Talked with some nice folks.  Told them they were great, when they were, which was often.
Heard a lot of amusing horror stories about San Diego Comic-Con, which is more or less what I expected.  Like so many dense metropoli, it sounds like a terrible agglomeration of desire, a breathtaking juxtaposition of greed fulfilled and unfulfilled.  Movie-princes and content-serfs.  Life occupying the same space, but on such vastly different scales that they can only interact indirectly, or in aggregate.
Or violently, of course.
And just like the redolent grandeur of other man-made and made-of-men wonders (Burning Man, Manhattan, the Cairo Bazaar, the Matrix), Comic-Con is something I absolutely must see for myself.  I won’t feel comfortable discussing it, or grassroots creative industry stuff as a whole, until I’ve been to the mountain top.
Since the floor was so easily viewed and dismissed, I was able to go to a few panels.  Unsurprisingly, the only ones I was interested in attending were people on the self-publishing spectrum.  There was a collection of local underground comixers, a few editorial cartoonists, a transmedia panel, and also a webcomics panel.
Ted Rall was on the political/editorial panel, and broke my heart with the depths of his pessimism about making money from eyeballs.
The transmedia panel was an odd-one.  A few guys were there to promote their motion-comics, but like you’d expect, this was quickly shunted aside.  A simple look at the convention floor, with its endless ranks of TV and movie trappings, should tell you: “transmedia” really means “panmedia”.  
Comics combine a low cost to entry and a premade audience of obsessive collectors and, for lack of a better word right now, instinctive re-tweeters.  A perfect medium to garnish ideas for more scalable money-makers on the one hand (ie, movies and tv shows), and garnish disposable income via clan-identifying merchandise on the other.  ”Transmedia” implies that there is an artistic medium which is a transitional state between two others, which is an okay description of motion comics.  But the real money is in aesthetic (and economic) unity across all available media, as it always has been (though we used to just call it merchandising).
The motion comics they showed off were pretty bad, too.  I mean, like, Gainax bad: as if you had a big physical page of panels and then moved the camera from one to the other in reading order.  And then the panels would move a tiny bit, like a cheap lenticular from the year 2080, while poorly paid actors (including Anna Faris?!) would read the comic aloud in your ear.  It was like an animatic that gave up on being a real movie.  Forced film neototony.  Axlotlotic art.
The next time someone asks me for a good kinetic comic, I’m going to send them to Samorost.  I’m going to laugh my head off as the players in the space haltingly recapitulate all the lessons adventure games designers knew two decades ago. 
But that was actually a blessedly small part of the panel.  Initially, discussion was dominated by an inside-baseball back-and-forth backpatting on the greying of the comic-reading audience, their conservatism, DC and Marvel being in a John-Woo-esque spiral of vicious yet graceful mutually assured destruction.  Then, FJ Desanto, my instant hero, producer of The Spirit (worth seeing, screw everyone who says otherwise), basically said that he didn’t know about any of that shit, but comic books, and comic book movies, are in general marketed absolutely terribly.
As he put it: “When I first saw Kick-Ass, I said to myself, ‘This movie is going to make 200 million dollars.’  Then I saw the initial press material, and I said ‘Okay, 100 million.’  Then time passed, and I grew amazed with how much of the potential was completely squandered.”
I suspect these problems are more related than he thinks: audience problems are also marketing problems.  Everyone on the panel agreed that no one was seriously trying to use the movies to sell more comics.  I mean, Free Comic Book Day keeps flipping around the calendar to coincide with big releases every summer, but really, I won’t be satisfied until Thor looks right at the audience and says “Find more adventures of me and my mighty companions at your local comics store!  Useth thou the retailer list shown prominently on Marvel.com, or else Google maps, forsooth!”
They also complained how crazy it was to hide the classic comics from kids by not putting them online for free or nearly-free. 
Speaking of which, the webcomics panel!  Most notably, it included Carla Speed-McNeil, who I found shockingly savvy.  Let that reflect poorly on me rather than her; as she herself said at the panel, she has a reputation as something of a luddite, and as I have said at other times, there are parts of her work that make my eyes roll back so hard it’s been injurious to my optic nerve, but she was way more gung-ho about the right way to make money off a free “product” than many of the other all-online-all-the-time people there.  From her point of view, the only unsolved problem was fulfillment: calculating various shipping options properly, without becoming fully dependent on Amazon or Lulu or some other folk.
So she was a high-point across many of the panels, but all in all, I kept on wanting to take the creator-interlocutors aside and explain what we know about creative business models online, and how possible it is to monetize what you love to do.
Then, in a mad, blessed coincidence, I was actually able to do that with one of them.
