---
layout: post
title: All Your Favorite Games Are Flash Games
date: '2011-05-23T13:29:41+00:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: http://nicknovitski.tumblr.com/post/5776162371/all-your-favorite-games-are-flash-games
---
I got briefly excited today when I discovered I-Console, a project that produces an API to allow other websites embed the java applet emulators that power the virtualnes, virtualsupernes and virtualgbx websites.
(If you didn’t already know about these websites, my apologies to your productivity.)
I imagined it would be something like Google Maps: a purely embedded, script-based, hosted by the emulation collective.  In my fondest dreams, when people wrote an article about the 4th dungeon in Legend of Zelda 2, they could play the game on virtualnes up until right before that dungeon, get a save code, then put an iframe in the middle of their post that would automatically load the save, so readers could play along and see exactly what the article was talking about.
The unfortunate reality is that to do that, you can’t just call load games directly from I-Console: any roms you use in a blogpost have to be hosted on the same server as that blogpost.  Sure, if you have a physical copy of the game, there’s nothing stopping you from making the same claim to legality that I-Console’s various subsidiaries use, but what’s the distinction between playing their roms via their applet framed by a site they own, and playing their roms via their applet framed by a site I own?  The emulator runs in the browser, so both scenarios feature exactly as many (or as few) “copies” being made of the game, as the rom is sent to the viewer, potentially bypassing the hypothetical blogger’s site.  It’s comparable to saying an arcade couldn’t let me borrow one of their legally purchased machines to play at home, lest we all be party to copyright infringement. 
In the course of my life, emulation has seemed to become more and more fragmented.  Despite many systems not having any completely accurate implementations, the majority of attention and effort has gone to getting popular implementations running on fun new devices with non-x86 chips (unlocked home and portable gaming consoles, phones, etc).  Then activity in the core project slows to a crawl, their leaders vanish or become hostile and insular, the porting projects can’t send back changes or improvements they’ve come up with, and you’re left with VisualBoyAdvance having three different successors, and ZSNES making its svn private (!) and promising that version 2.0 is “just around the corner” for at least three years. 
Whenever I think about duplicated work in the world of open source, I always remember this talk:

I don’t disagree with anything that he says, but I don’t like the consequences that it has had in emulation.  These are significant undertakings, that benefit from broad-based involvement (everyone can report a bug, or donate hardware), and there’s huge amounts of momentum being passed up, even in large, unified projects like MAME.  There’s a lot of work still to be done, but the organization to get it done is lacking.  Generations of code-culture have risen and fallen, leaving many of these projects stranded on the shores of a mixed metaphor.  There’s new and better ways to generate and encourage community.  There’s even, to get back to where I started, new and better ways to serve applications to the user. 
Virtualnes was the application that really helped me understand the potential of browser-based games (and by extension other kinds of applications, yes, but they’re boring).  Then and now, you could find people who spoke of “flash games” as something to be sneered at, as a genre unto itself, defined by time-wasters and twitch-rewarders, terrible art and worse writing, tired mechanics and obnoxious challenges, a momentary distraction from a boring life.  Well, let me tell you something: if “flash games” are a genre, the beloved Nintendo games of our childhood fit right the fuck in.  Virtualnes (and later, Minecraft) showed me that software complex enough to swallow countless childhoods could be served near-instantly to anyone in the world, as long as they had a browser and could install the Java runtime.
And now we have Google’s Native Client project, hoping to eliminate that second requirement.
The grand promise of Native Client is that a new kind of web-based application with the speed and power of native code can run on any device with a Chromium-based browser.  The javascript on the page can communicated with a compiled C or C++ back-end, downloaded and managed transparently, and run in a sandboxed environment.  It’s the next generation of Flash, except standards-compliant and power-efficient.  Best of all, you don’t even have to learn a new proprietary language to use it! Native client leverages your C++ and HTML and CSS skills into a dynamic synergy (“and other buzzwords as well!”).
If you haven’t already, please take a minute to be astounded by the NaClBox Gallery, where you can play demos of DOS classics right in your browser, thanks to the emulator DOSBox, running in Native Client.  Try to imagine all the other emulators that could be made to run in it.  Imagine the next generation of subscription-based services like Gametap.  Imagine the Hulu of videogames.  Current commercial offerings for the nostalgia market (Virtual Console, some XboxLive Arcade stuff) are a pale shadow of the field’s true potential.
And then take a moment to try to imagine what kind of games you could run, with what kind of performance, if you weren’t emulating anything at all, but just porting?  What if you designed a game to run in Native Client?
I notice that the creator of NaCLBox also complains that other people don’t seem to see the same possibilities for Native Client that he does.  I wonder if it might be a cultural problem, if anything that needs coordination between C-specialists and Web-specialists will suffer from a history professional and educational siloing.  If so, I don’t think the division can last forever.  Or at least, when I think about what the two disciplines can do together, I don’t want to think so.
