---
layout: post
title: Is female sexuality monstrous?
date: '2012-06-03T07:59:15+00:00'
tags:
- creepy sex shit
tumblr_url: http://nicknovitski.tumblr.com/post/24332343885/is-female-sexuality-monstrous
---
The Three GendersThere are times when I look into a pretty smirking face tilted upwards and think, ‘Christ, she’s an animal’, and then, ‘but it’s not her, it’s her spirit of womanhood deep down’. Her brain-pussy nexus makes demands of her delicately throbbing heart because she likes what she sees. But what does she see? When a 5’2” 110lb Indian girl flashes her teeth, eyelashes trembling and wants to press her finely carved face against mine I fail to imagine the colour of her lust. Were my sexuality aligned with hers rather than opposed to hers I would hunger for a 7’2” 320lb hairy killer, a world class troll.I have yet to adorn myself with pink garments or buttock hugging tights, to groom and paint my legs for a night out carelessly girding my thong clad hips with a handkerchief. Yet a woman attentive to such appearances commands my gaze.Is our sexuality defined more by our own physicality or the appearances of those we are drawn to?Right now I see teenage girl loping across a bridge on long lithe tanned legs. Her pink socks please me no end. Pink socks on the end of creamy smooth sunned shanks. Whose sexuality is the softer?I think ours is. I admire woman’s sexuality as the more dangerous and wonder, positing the existence of a third gender, what blasphemous embraces, what illicit shivers, what exquisite genital pulsings await the male sexual explorer in the clutches of that wild beast, an ab-human manifestation of abstract gender, who would face us if we turned to look in the direction of a woman’s lust.I am not a brave man and remain content to hanker after pink socks but I urge all of you to investigate this new erotic frontier with diligence and fervour and report back your discoveries. Homosexuality in the context of this observation is narcissistic, directed neither one way nor the other.So my theory is that the hunting down and confronting of monsters, the sweaty grappling with monkey-demons in the dark, with the shades down so to speak, is in reality a sexual playtime for you male gaming nerds. Not me. You, you fruitcakes.
